Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And David Crews. Over the next several programs, we are
going to be talking with and about author and editor Joe Haldeman. Although he
appeared in print for the first time in 1969 with a short story in the science
fiction magazine Galaxy, Haldeman gained tremendous popularity when he came out
with his multi-award winning novel, The Forever War. The novel was serialized in
astounding science fiction, starting in 1972, then released as a book in 1974.
The Forever War is similar to Robert Heinlein's book, Starship Troopers, in that
both have intergalactic war, powered body armor, and highly advanced weapons as
common elements. Differences between the books show up in the way the authors
treat war. Heinlein's conflict was sort of a John Wayne-style battle with the
bad guys, whereas Haldeman's dealt with the emotions and reactions of his
characters to the war they fought. We asked Haldeman if the resemblance was
intentional. Well, there was no intention on my part. In fact, I didn't realize
until I was about 70 or 80 pages into the book that many of the details were
similar to Starship Troopers. Somebody else pointed that out when he read the
manuscript. I wasn't doing an answer to Heinlein's book. I thought Heinlein's
book was admirable in many ways, even though we have diametrically opposed
philosophies. But the, no, it was, if there's any relation to any book, it is to
my own first novel, War Year, because it's an expansion into a science fiction
universe of the notions that I was trying to express in a mainstream novel.
Haldeman has a background in physics and astronomy, and told us about how he
uses his hard science background in his work. Well, I try to use it to make the
worlds that I invent more believable. At least to me, since I do have a
background in science and engineering, I think, well, the writer has to at least
suspend his own disbelief while he's making up these stories. And it's easier
for me to do it if it's on a fairly solid scientific foundation. Even though my
science is rather old-fashioned and probably rather sloppy by a real scientist's
standards, it's still enough to convince me, so it's fulfilled its function.
In the Forever War, the soldiers experience time dilation when they travel to
and from the war zone. That means that due to the tremendous velocity of their
spaceships, dozens of years have passed on Earth, while only a few months have
passed for the soldiers on the spaceships. Haldeman told us how he used hard
science to evoke some of the feeling the soldiers have. It goes deeper than just
description. The time dilation in the Forever War, though it's scientifically
accurate, its main function is metaphorical, and that is to demonstrate how the
soldiers who fight a war become isolated from the culture that they're supposed
to be protecting. It's using a science-fictional device to exaggerate something
that happens to every soldier. I remember when I came back from Vietnam, I was
suddenly plunged into what was an alien culture, even though I'd only been a
soldier for two years. A lot of things had changed. You know, it's not a great
thing to come back. There were no victory parades and that sort of thing.
Join us next time when we continue our interview with Joe Haldeman.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And David Crews. Today we'll be continuing our interview
with author Joe Haldeman. It was mentioned in the previous program that Haldeman
served in Vietnam and uses that experience in some of his stories. For instance,
in one of his stories, he tells of a soldier who is severely hurt by a laser
mine. We asked Haldeman if that was drawn from his own experiences. Well, yeah,
I was wounded pretty severely in Vietnam. I was hospitalized for six months. And
it was a booby trap. I didn't set it off. Somebody else did. But it was a pretty
big one. I had over 200 separate wounds. But managed to come out of it all right
after a few months of physical therapy. So it's, yeah, I draw on that
experience. The one you're talking about is a mind of his own. But I think I've
got other short stories like "The Private War of Private Jacob" that draw on that
memory. We wondered if he was exorcising demons by writing about that
experience. I don't know whether I am or not. I think I'm just using available
material. I don't think the demon is too easily exercised by fiction. We asked
if being in Vietnam had any other effects on his writing. Being in the Army had
an important effect on my writing, aside from war, because I met a whole new
class of people. That is, all of my friends, while I was growing up, tended to
be white, middle-class, upper-middle-class kids. And their successors, white,
middle-class, upper-class scientists, and so forth. And it was just a mundane
revelation to find that people who came from different backgrounds still had an
awful lot in common with me. Most of the guys in my combat outfit were urban
black high school or junior high school dropouts. And I got along quite well.
Haldeman has written two novels and edited one anthology, all dealing with war.
But by no means should you consider him just a writer of war stories. That's
right. He writes about what happens to people who are placed in that type of
violent situation. He seems to be exploring what makes his characters tick more
than the situations surrounding the characters. One of the themes in his work is
man or mankind being changed when facing conflict. We asked Haldeman to respond
to that. I think it's obvious that confronting death on a daily basis changes
people, sometimes radically for the worse. I met people who are totally
dehumanized by war. But speaking racially, I don't think you could make such a
broad statement. What's behind some of the things I'm writing is the hope that
human nature eventually may improve to the point where we won't have wars. We
find other ways to settle our differences. In his novel, All My Sins Remembered,
the main character is red-taped and shuffled into doing something that he is
diametrically opposed to. When he rebels against the situation, he is
terminated. The story is about a bureaucracy that totally takes over a man's
identity, and he doesn't really exist except as a tool for that bureaucracy.
When he becomes an efficient tool, he's scrapped. The main character ends up
being a spy for the government and carrying out covert operations for them. And
he does them more or less against his will. That is to say, through very
advanced techniques of conditioning, he's turned into a thoroughly different
person. He was a Buddhist, a pacifist when he started out. They did not get the
job he signed up for. They twisted him around into being a killing machine. If
all this makes Haldeman sound like a pessimist, well, he's not that either. Join
us next time when we find out more about Joe Haldeman.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And David Crews. Today we continue our interview with
author Joe Haldeman. So far in our conversation with Haldeman, we've discussed
how he used his experiences in Vietnam in his writing, and some of his early
works. Now we're going to look at his writing style in two particular stories. A
short story to Howard Hughes' A Modest Proposal, and a novel, Mindbridge.
Haldeman tells these stories by using narratives by the main characters in the
stories, reports by them and others, portions of books written long after the
time set in the story, and other non-standard writing techniques. We asked him
if he got the ideas for this type of style when he was attending the Iowa
Writers' Conference. Oh, not really. The connection is with John Dos Passos,
actually. I read the USA trilogy some years before I wrote Mindbridge, and
really was impressed by the way it worked, and thought it would work really well
in science fiction. So I tried it out in a rather long short story, to Howard
Hughes' A Modest Proposal. And it looked like it would work, so I went ahead and
applied it to Mindbridge. I did do most of that book while I was studying at
Iowa, and that's why the dedication. The authors at the Iowa Writers' Conference
were, for the most part, not science fiction writers. We asked Haldeman about
their reaction to his being a science fiction author. Well, they were a little
apprehensive about it. See, they didn't know I was a science fiction writer when
I joined the workshop. So I joined on the basis of my first novel, which was not
science fiction. And some of them were outwardly hostile towards science
fiction, such as Stanley Elkin. Others were anywhere between apprehensive and
slightly sympathetic. Stephen Becker, one of them, had actually had a few pieces
in the magazine Fantasy and Science Fiction. In general, though, they thinly
disguised the attitude that this stuff was just commercial fiction, and
therefore beneath contempt. That's an attitude I've never understood. Some of
the world's finest literature is science fiction. We asked Haldeman what he
thought about that type of attitude. But the field is judged by its worst, not
by its best. And people like that think of science fiction, they think in terms
of grade-B movies and lousy television. They've never read much of the best of
the field.
Using science fiction, it's possible to consider various aspects of mankind's
future, and science fiction is the only literary form to speculate about the
future. We asked Haldeman if he thought that mankind might be radically
different in the future. I think it's quite possible, even, say, within the span
of a century. So many of the things that determine human nature are things that
can be mitigated by technology, such as the problem of dying so soon. That is,
it's possible that we'll, in a couple of generations, be able to live a century,
two centuries, maybe a thousand years, maybe as long as we care to. That'll
radically change human nature because it will take the pressure off of
individuals.
There are other less sanguine notions. It's possible that sciences and
communication will grow into a kind of sophisticated mind control where it will
be difficult for the individual to know exactly what is his idea and what has
been induced by his own society. Sort of a sophisticated, lifelong brainwashing
doesn't seem too unlikely. And you can argue that it's that now. Join us next
time when we wrap up our interview with Joe Haldeman and find out how he got
involved with Star Trek.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and David Crews, and today we're going to wrap up our
interview with author Joe Haldeman. Haldeman has been involved in two multi-book
series, one called Attar the Merman, and the other was Star Trek from the TV
series. Although he enjoyed writing the first of his three Attar books, the ones
that followed had nowhere to go to expand the characters. The publisher was
banking on the current popularity of dolphins and whales, but the series never
took hold and Haldeman's third book was never published. The Star Trek novels
were a different sort of challenge, as Haldeman explains. Well, it was just
being in the right place at the right time, in a way. You know, Jim Blish was
doing the series of these things, and I knew they were quite financially
successful. And when Jim died, I was in correspondence with Fred Pohl, who was
his editor there. And I just, you know, apologized for being like a vulture
circling over the corpse, but I asked whether anybody was picking up Jim's work.
And he said, why don't you give me a try? Well, Jim was taking the scripts from
the TV show and just turning them into short stories, whereas they wanted me to
do what Jim would have done if he had lived, which was write original novels
around the Star Trek characters. Writing these novels was more than just sitting
down and coming up with something for Spock, McCoy, and Kirk to do. Haldeman had
to work out some other problems first. That was sort of cute, though. Writing
the first one, I had fun because I'd been in service during most of Star Trek.
And so I had to treat it as a research project. And I went and saw the TV show
every afternoon, and then I read all the books and made charts and things like
that and sat down and wrote the books. That was an odd thing. I had to sign a
two-bub contract. And whereas I found the first one very interesting and fun to
write, the second one was quite difficult to write. And the first one took three
months and the second took nine. One of Haldeman's latest projects is a trilogy,
of which the first book, Worlds, is already out. Haldeman gave us a little
background on that novel. Well, it starts out about a century from now. And it's
essentially the story of a woman who grew up, was born and grew up on a space
colony, a space settlement. And is sent to Earth for a year of postgraduate
work, or finishing, if you want to call it that. Being set up for a political
position as a liaison between this world and Earth. And various strange things
happened to her in the year that she's here. It's sort of a old building from a
kind of a novel. She grows by being sort of bounced around by Earth. And the
second novel, Stars, takes over where the first one ends and takes her into old
age. It seems as if a lot of authors are writing trilogies these days, and we
wondered why Haldeman decided to write one. Well, it seems like an awfully big
thing to put into one book. And it looks as if each one of the trilogy, each
volume of the trilogy, will be longer than any other book I've ever written. By
at least a third in each one. So indeed, it would have been a book nearly a half
million words long. It's rather difficult to sell. And I just, you know,
everybody's doing trilogies like it. I do a trilogy too, as part of it. They're
very successful. The second and third books have a built-in audience.
Also, I wanted to try something big. And that's as good a reason as any. We've
discussed in the previous sections of this interview that Haldeman's main
concern is storytelling. He develops interesting characters and sets them in a
believable scientific background.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.